Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about an app that is
installed on one in four phones across
the world, an app that has caught the
attention of presidents, and an app
that 10 years ago didn't even exist.
The app is, of course, TikTok.
Now, unless you have been
living under a rock, you will
probably have heard of TikTok.
It’s an incredibly popular
app that has gone from nothing
to almost two billion users.
Maybe you’re one of
them, maybe you’re not.
In either case, the story of the
growth of TikTok is fascinating.
So in this episode we’ll look at where
it came from, how it exploded, why it is
so popular, not just from an emotional
point of view but also the technology
that makes this possible, and look at
how this one app took over the world.
Let’s get right into it.
We're looking at TikTok.
We may be banning TikTok, we
may be doing some other things.
There are a couple of options,
but a lot of things are happening,
so we'll see what happens.
But we are looking at a lot of
alternatives with respect to TikTok.
That was former president
Donald Trump in July of 2020.
Sure, it might not have been the most
eloquent of speeches, but the point is
that the President of the United States
publicly announced that he was looking
at banning TikTok, an app that started
out as a way for teenage girls to record
themselves singing along to music.
So, the big question we’ll
look at today is…why?
Now, the first point to address is one
that might sound like a simple question.
What is TikTok?
Is it a social network?
Is it a social media app?
Is it a video sharing platform?
Is it an entertainment service?
It’s a hard one to put a label
on, but it’s a bit of everything.
Let me quickly explain how it works
from a superficial level, just in
case you are not a TikTok user.
When you open the TikTok app, you are
immediately presented with a short
video created by another TikTok user.
The video starts playing right away.
You can do nothing, and the video will
keep playing, and then play again when
it gets to the end, you can swipe up,
to be shown a new video, you can “like”
the video by pressing a heart button,
you can comment on it, you can share
it, you can bookmark it, etcetera.
On the surface of it, simple,
you might be thinking.
Based on this description alone,
it sounds a little like YouTube
or any other video sharing app.
But as we’ll come to discuss shortly,
this design has important consequences,
and is a big part of why TikTok has
experienced such explosive growth.
And when it comes to this explosive
growth Tik Tok has grown faster
than any other app in history.
You might have heard that TikTok is
a Chinese app, but it is actually an
interesting mix of Chinese and American,
or at least apps that built off success
both in China and in the United States.
So, a brief history.
The origin of TikTok is an app called
Musical.ly, which was built by two
Chinese friends in Shanghai back in 2014.
It was an app that allowed people to
create and share short lip-synching
videos, videos where people pretended to
sing songs at the same time as the music.
But, Musical.ly never really
took off in China, it was never a
great success in its home market.
Instead, it found early traction,
initial success, across the
Pacific in the United States.
And specifically, with a market of
teenage girls, who absolutely loved it.
Teenage girls might love to lip-synch,
to dance and pretend to sing along
with pop songs, but it’s not everyone’s
cup of tea, and there are only so
many teenage girls in the world.
In any case, Musical.ly
was clearly onto something.
Back in China, a Beijing-based technology
company called ByteDance, was developing
its own video-sharing app that was
heavily inspired by, some might even
say directly copied from, Musical.ly.
In September of 2016, it launched
an app called Douyin, which was
available exclusively in China.
Within a year, it had 100 million
users, and was racking up one billion
views of its videos every single day.
Clearly, it was onto something big,
and so it launched an international
version of the app, which was
made available outside China.
This app was, of course, TikTok.
Now, Douyin and TikTok are very
similar, but not exactly the same.
They look very similar if you just
open the app, but Douyin has some more
advanced features, such as the ability
to buy things directly within the app.
Anyway, both apps were growing
fast - Douyin within China,
and TikTok internationally.
To accelerate its international growth,
in 2017 ByteDance bought Musical.ly,
this app that was super-successful
in the United States with this
niche audience of teenage girls.
The price tag was a reported billion
dollars - a lot of money, but it would
turn out to be quite the bargain.
In 2018 the acquisition was complete, and
Musical.ly merged with TikTok, becoming
one joint app, with the copied app buying
the original version it was copied from.
Over the next few years, TikTok
began to advertise heavily in the
United States, spending by some
estimates hundreds of millions of
dollars a month on advertising,
trying to hook new users on the app.
Companies like Facebook and Snapchat were
all too happy to accept TikTok’s money.
They were getting paid handsomely,
and besides, it didn’t seem like a
threat - a Chinese app had never had
any real success in the United States.
American culture is unique, it’s not
something a foreign app can easily
crack, especially an app from a culture
as different to the US’s as China’s.
But there was something that these
American technology companies
hadn’t understood properly, or at
least hadn’t properly appreciated.
Tiktok was different.
It didn’t rely on cultural relevance
or understanding, it worked
in a completely different way.
And this brings us back to what I hinted
at earlier, in terms of the design of
the app, how TikTok works on the surface.
When you think of the other social media
apps you might use, think Instagram,
Facebook, Snapchat, or Twitter, they
typically work on a “social graph” basis.
Going back to the early days of
Facebook, you would be friends with
people, Facebook would understand that
you had a relationship with them, and
show you their photos and updates.
As these products grew and
became more advanced, more
complexity was added to this.
You could follow pages of businesses,
you could express your interests,
Facebook would see who you sent messages
to, it bought Instagram, and so on.
Instagram, Twitter and Snapchat all
worked in slightly different ways,
but the principle was the same:
you create an account, you create
connections between people, and you
see the content that these people post.
But the problem here is that
this isn’t always what people
want to see and engage with.
You might be Facebook friends with someone
you went to university with 15 years ago,
or even school 60 years ago, but are you
interested in what they are doing now?
You might have chosen to follow someone
on Instagram or Twitter because you’re
interested in their tips about making
cookies, but do you want to hear
their opinion about the World Cup?
Sometimes, but often the answer is “no”.
TikTok completely bypassed this,
it avoided the question of forming
cross-directional relationships
between people altogether.
Yes, you can follow people on TikTok,
in the same way as you can on other
social networks, but TikTok’s focus is
on serving you videos that it thinks you
will like, regardless of who made them.
It’s the quality of the content
that matters, not your relationship
with the person who created it.
That’s why, when you open the TikTok
app, it opens on a page called “For
you”, which could be any kind of video
that the app thinks you will enjoy.
And how does it decide
what you will enjoy?
Well, here’s the clever part.
On a very superficial level, you can
say it’s “the algorithm”, the computer
code that decides what you like
based on what you have liked before.
But let’s go several levels deeper,
because it’s not just a case of there
being an extremely smart set of computer
code sitting on a server somewhere.
We need to talk about two things.
First, the design of the
TikTok app, and how this is
different to other social apps.
Remember, you only ever see one video
per screen, so the TikTok algorithm can
get a sense of your thoughts about that
video based on the actions you take.
Do you swipe up right away
to move onto another video?
OK, that indicates it wasn’t interesting.
Did you watch it all?
Good, that’s a promising start.
Did you watch it all and
then tap the heart button?
Better, you probably like it
Did you watch it all several times,
tap the heart button, follow the
person who made it, then send it to
lots of people and save the video?
Boom, I think we’re in business,
you clearly like this a lot.
When you contrast this to the information
that an app like Facebook or Twitter gets,
where there are often multiple pieces
of content on the screen, Facebook and
Twitter have more difficulty figuring out
what you actually think about something.
If you scrolled past something,
did you just miss it, or were
you not interested in it?
If you stopped scrolling, which
piece of content were you looking at?
Did you stop because you agreed or
disagreed with that piece of content?
See, the entire design of TikTok makes
it far easier for the algorithm to
figure out what you like and don’t like.
And when it comes to the actual
content on TikTok, the videos that
users make, the TikTok algorithm is
very good at recognising what is in a
video, recognising people and objects
and general “stuff” that's going on.
But that’s not all.
This is combined with a team of people
who are going through the videos and
manually checking and assigning tags
and categories to each video, so that
when  the algorithm sees the actions
people take on these videos, all that
information is stored and can be used to
make better recommendations in the future.
Now to the second reason that this
TikTok recommendation algorithm
is so good at recommending videos.
Like every other social network,
TikTok’s algorithm relies heavily on
machine learning, where an algorithm
is trained on large amounts of data.
The more input data it has to
train on, the better the output,
the better the recommendation.
And this brings us back to the early
history of TikTok, and to Musical.ly,
which was, you’ll remember, the
Chinese app that was very popular in
the United States with teenage girls.
When Musical.ly and Tiktok merged,
Tiktok got access to billions of
hours of content that it could use
to train and improve its algorithm.
This gave it a huge head start.
And as more and more content is created
on TikTok the better its recommendation
algorithm gets, the more time people
spend on it, the more videos are
created, which in turn improves the
recommendation algorithm, and so on..
Which brings us back to President
Trump at the start of the episode.
By 2020, TikTok had more than 800 million
users outside of China, and was drawing
the attention of American politicians.
The advertising, reportedly more
than a billion dollars a year, was
working, and the app was adding
millions of new users every single day.
Now, why was this problematic, why did
it warrant President Trump proclaiming
that he was looking at banning the app?
Well, a few reasons.
Firstly, TikTok’s parent company,
ByteDance, was Chinese, and–like
any large Chinese company–had close
ties to the Chinese Communist Party.
TikTok is technically an American
company, with data on its American
users stored in the US, not in China,
but it was a perceived security threat.
There was the worry of what TikTok
would do if it was asked by its
parent company, and ultimately
asked by the Chinese government, to
share personal data on its American
users with the Chinese government.
As you’ve heard, the more you use
TikTok, the better it knows you, and
so there were security concerns about
how this personal data could be used.
Secondly, it was one thing to have a
company like Facebook, now of course
“Meta”, but one thing to have an
American company like Facebook or
Google be powerful and influential,
but to have hundreds of millions of
Americans opening up a Chinese-made app
every day, in an era of increased trade
protectionism, well that was a first.
Thirdly, there were concerns about the
impact that TikTok was having on American
culture, and society more widely.
US TikTok users are now spending an
average of 80 minutes a day on the app,
more than Facebook and Instagram combined,
primarily watching videos recommended
by an algorithm developed in Beijing.
Now, what’s wrong with this?
Perhaps, nothing, it's simply a very
efficient algorithm and provides
users with relevant and personalised
recommendations on the best content
for them at any particular time.
But sceptics have highlighted
the potential for this to be
used in non-innocent ways.
For example, if you wanted to reduce
the amount of educational content
that was available to US teenagers and
increase the amount of socially divisive
content, well, that can be done with a
tweak, a small change, of the algorithm.
And the dangers of excessive social
media use by teenagers is well-known.
In China, children under the
age of 14 are restricted from
spending more than 40 minutes a
day on Douyin, the Chinese TikTok.
Outside China, there is no such limit,
with many teenagers spending most
of their day sucked into the app.
So, the sceptics ask, why is this
app limited in China, but promoted so
heavily and without any limits abroad?
And it’s this that is perhaps
most alarming, this almost
science-fiction like power of an
app to shape culture and society.
Now, it should be said that TikTok
of course is not banned, and since
Trump spoke about potentially banning
it, it has gone from strength to
strength, not just in the United
States but all over the world.
There are almost a billion international
TikTok users, and the app has experienced
huge success in places with very
little cultural similarities to China.
In the Middle East, for example,
TikTok is hugely popular.
It’s popular in Indonesia, Brazil,
France, Iceland, all over the world.
And this is the beauty, you could
say, of the way in which the
recommendation algorithm works.
It surpasses, it jumps over
cultural norms and traditions.
All that matters is what
you, as a TikTok user, like.
If you use TikTok, you’ll probably know
all too well that the algorithm has an
incredible way of showing you videos
that you like, no matter your interests.
If you like fish, “fishtok” has 17
billion views, medieval role playing
videos have 4 billion views, and you
may well have seen that there is no
shortage of English teachers dancing
around and teaching you idioms or telling
you you need to stop saying “I’m fine”.
By the way, I think it’s absolutely
fine to say “I’m fine”, but of course
it’s the controversial viewpoints
that get all the attention on TikTok.
Now, another interesting development,
or implication of the way the TikTok
recommendation algorithm works, is
that it has made it far easier for
people to find videos even made by
small, relatively unknown people.
If you compare this to YouTube or
Instagram, for example, previously
with these apps you would only see
content from people you follow, which
in many cases would be celebrities
or people with large followings.
With TikTok, because the algorithm is not
primarily based on friends or followers,
videos can go viral based on merit alone,
based on how entertaining they are,
which has led to a burst of creativity.
The TikTok app makes it very easy for
anyone to create funny videos using only
their phone, so now anyone in the world
has the chance of creating something
that will be seen by millions of people,
you don’t have to be Kim Kardashian.
And, of course, the easier it is to
create videos and be seen by millions of
people, the more people create videos,
and the more people create videos, the
more input data the algorithm has, the
better it gets, the more people come back
to TikTok, the more people create videos,
as you can see it is a virtuous circle.
And all this leads us
back to the present day.
While Facebook, Snapchat and YouTube were
all too happy to take TikTok’s billions of
marketing dollars, they have now realised
that TikTok has been eating their lunch.
Every minute spent on TikTok is a
minute that can’t be spent on another
social network, and in a business
where eyeballs and time equal money,
TikTok has gone from a  customer to a
competitor, perhaps even, a predator.
And what this has led to is an increasing
TikTok-ization of apps like Facebook
and Instagram, where your friends and
followers are being deprioritised in
favour of algorithmic recommendations.
If you’re a user of these apps, you’ll
probably have seen this already, with
“for you” style tabs where you are shown
content that the app thinks you will like.
And, according to most
commentators, this is bound to
continue because…well, it works.
Until TikTok, there was very little
true innovation in social media
apps, the innovation there was was
usually swiftly copied by others.
“Stories” was first a Snapchat
development, before it was copied
by Instagram and then Facebook.
Twitter “Spaces” is the same
idea as “Clubhouse”, and there
are countless other examples.
The innovation of TikTok was to completely
flip the “social” element of social
media on its head, and instead approach
the problem more as “how can we show you
the most entertaining video right now?”
As it turns out, it doesn’t matter
who made the video, they could be
your best friend or they could be
someone on the other side of the
world that you’ve never seen before.
And this is the real power, you could
say the “equalising” power, of TikTok.
So, to conclude this exploration into
this hugely influential app, even if
you never download or install TikTok,
you will experience the effects of
TikTok on culture, society, and on the
products and services you use, you’ll
see how TikTok has already changed the
world, and will continue to change it.
If you look on the TikTok website,
you’ll find the words “ Our mission is
to inspire creativity and bring joy.”
Certainly, there is no doubt that
it has inspired a vast amount of
creativity, and brought joy to
billions of people around the world.
The question remains though,
about what unforeseen other things
it might have brought with it.
OK then, that is it for
today's episode on TikTok.
I hope it's been an interesting one, and
whether you are an avid TikTok user or
you’ve never even seen a TikTok, well,
I hope that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Do you use TikTok?
Do you think it’s a harmless and
entertaining app, or it’s something
a little bit more nefarious?
How much control do you think
governments should have over
the apps and services we use?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.